SOURCE [S2]: J. Waterhouse, M. Wheatley, A. Stephen, C. Hogben, G. Jones, A. Goodyear, T. Farmer, P. McCullen,
"JET CODAS - the final status", Fusion Engineering and Design 210 (2025) 114737, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2024.114737
Open access under CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), Crown Copyright 2024, Published by Elsevier B.V. (licence per Crossref record of the version of record).
Excerpt captured from the publisher HTML full text on 2026-09-18 (section 3.4 only, verbatim).

3.4. Control and protection systems

Fig. 3 shows an overview of the JET Control and Protection systems.

The Personal Safety & Access Control System (PSACS) consists of an extensive key exchange and two complementary hard-wired electrical loops. One of these electrical interlocks ensures that the plant is isolated and areas are safe for personnel access, the other ensures that access is inhibited and plant can be energised.

The Central Interlocks and Safety System (CISS) consists of a network of ten JET pulse-oriented PLCs. These monitor the plant/actuator state per sub-system. It ensures that all required plant sub-systems are in the correct state to allow pulsing. CISS was built as a finite state machine with combinatorial input logic. From a modern perspective, it would have been nice to have a boundary layer around the core logic to implement input and output overrides but as this was not implemented, overrides had to be done electrically on terminal blocks. Either way, strong administrative controls are required for the management of overrides. When control systems were not required the corresponding CISS was taken out along with the associated CODAS sub-system. Similar technology was also used for the cooling water Drain and Refill systems and the cyro-pump interlocks.

The core plasma control system on JET [9] consists of: a fast PC/FPGA based vertical stabilisation system with plasma position velocity control of the appropriate power supplies and coils; and a slower VME based shape controller based on VME/PowerPC [10]. The shape controller was implemented as a sequence of control phases configured from level-1, and is not only aware of power supply and coil current and voltage limits but also in some cases predicts power supply thermal constraints thereby implementing some aspects of protection.

The Pulse Termination Network (PTN) [11] is core to the controlled termination of plasmas. It consists of a set of inputs from physical plant (inc. CISS) and programmable inputs from software implemented protection systems that are mapped onto a set of control outputs which stop various to plant systems. Additionally, inputs and outputs can be enabled or disabled and inputs can be generated on a timer and latched and time stamped on activation. The system was implemented in CAMAC using custom embedded controllers. Hardwired inputs and outputs were implemented using pulse trains over fibre optics. Several PTN outputs are used to trigger the Disruption Mitigation System (DMS), consisting of the Disruption Mitigation Vales (DMVs) and experimental Shattered Pellet Injector. As the injection of a massive quantity of gas into a plasma with Neutral Beam or RF heating would be undesirable, these triggers first cause the heating systems to be turned off and then conditioned with an acknowledgement from the heating plant (and timeout) before activating the DMS.

The Plant Enable Window System (PEWS) provides enable windows, realised as pulse trains over FO links, to heating systems plant based on time in the pulse and basic plasma conditions. The first incarnation, PEWS was based on the same CAMAC embedded controller technology as PTN and provided basic interlocks with plasma current and density along with the programmed time windows. Its successor, PEWS2 was based on VME/PowerPC technology and provided enhanced neutral beam shine-through calculations on a PINI-by-PINI basis and signalling to the Neutral Beams local manager when individual PINIs were likely to cause problems. In practice, both PEWS and PEWS2 were used in parallel.

The Plasma Density Validation (PDV) system provided a density signal to various control and protection systems. It used an ordered list of potential plasma density (generally line integral signals at particular locations) with an algorithm that on failure of the current signal simply dropped to the next signal source in the ordered list.

With the advent of the ILW [12] a significant consolidation of the real-time network and, in particular, the expansion of the real-time protection systems was required [13]. For the protection of the ILW, this infrastructure was extended to provide links from IR protection cameras and bolometers [14], through to the Vessel Thermal Map (VTM) [15] and on to local managers to reduce heating selectively. The real-time protection system was also used to implement disruption pre-cursors and trigger the DMVs.

A protection controller was also developed that could take the real-time signals from a multitude of sources directly and other protection systems via the ATM network and act on them in a sophisticated way. This was known as the Real-Time Protection Sequence (RTPS) [16]. This could initiate slow and fast termination of the plasma through PTN via 16 configurable direct connections. Unlike PTN, RTPS was able to act hierarchically so that subsequent alarms could generate a more urgent stop. RTPS was also able to take control of the waveforms used to drive, the shape controller and the heating systems such as RF and Neutral Beams via their local manager to ramp down the plasma current and heating power to give a softer landing for the plasma termination. One particular feature of RTPS was the Jump to Termination (JTT). On a jump to termination, RTPS would signal to the shape controller, heating system local manager and gas injection local managers to move forward in their waveforms to the termination region. At the time, the language use for this was not clear and well understood leading to confusion as, during a JTT there were two views of time, the time in the waveforms, used to drive the actuators, and the time in the plasma pulse as executed. A better language would have been time within a sequence of plasma control and jumps from within one sequence to the start of another, the termination sequence, and the time in the plasma pulse as executed. RTPS was implemented on a VME PowerPC running VXWorks like the RTCC systems and Local managers mentioned earlier, but unlike these systems was the first system to use MARTe. The system was configured from Level-1 by the SL [17].

With the advent of PCs running real-time Linux, more sophisticated protection algorithms were possible. WALLS [18] took inputs from magnetic diagnostics, the plasma control system, heating system local managers, PDV, bolometry and thermocouples and applied a model based algorithm computing plasma wall loading, the position of the strike points of the plasma in tiles, the penetration of the plasma between tile, the angle of incidence of power on tiles, the plasma power load on tiles and the bulk and surface temperature of tiles due to plasma power loads. If predicted limits were exceeded, WALLS generated alarms that were sent to RTPS to be actioned. This provides a backup when cameras in VTM are blind. Two systems, known as APODIS [19] and RAPTOR [20] were implemented to looks for disruption precursors. Prior to the high power DT campaigns, a system known as PETRA [21] was developed to provide another disruption precursor detector. Additionally, PETRA had an algorithm to detect early signs that the plasma was not going to progress very well, dud detection, and terminate early, thus saving on tritium usage. As with the other protection systems, alarms were sent via real-time networks to RTPS and on to PTN to be actioned.

An automated analysis, through Level-1, of log files from the various protection systems is run, post pulse, to produce an ordered list of events that lead to termination of the pulse.

(Also from section 3.3, Level-1:) "Many configuration details of the plant, such as mandatory protection setting are automatically derived from the Session Leader pulse requirements, e.g. the Plant Enable Windows System setting and use of Disruption Mitigation when the plasma current is greater than 2 MA."
